Welcome to JW Broadcasting for December 2023.
On September 9, 2023, the 48 students of the 154th
Class of Gilead graduated in the presence of their family, friends,
and the United States Bethel family.
Mature brothers serving at Bethel, along with their Gilead instructors,
gave the students loving encouragement and reminders
to help them fulfill their commission, to strengthen and stabilize
God's people wherever they are assigned.
We are sharing these motivating talks with you in Part 1 of this Gilead graduation program.
Well, we are here to celebrate with graduating class number 154
of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
Are you excited?
Well, we're excited for you.
And this is the culmination of five months of hard work on your part.
And we want to say that we are proud of each and every one of you.
And we love you.
And we know that you're going to do a tremendous amount of good in your assignments.
Now, unlike the Chairman of the Midweek Meeting,
I'm not going to be able to give you an overview of the information
that we're going to hear this morning.
But I can tell you one thing.
I've looked over the themes that the instructors and other responsible brothers have turned in.
And they're mighty interesting.
So let's get started.
Let's hear the first talk.
Now, the first talk is going to be given by brother, Judy Jadley,
who was recently chosen as a helper to the service committee.
And brother, Jadley's theme is, remember the builder.
Let's listen.
A master builder is responsible for every aspect in the creation of a building,
beginning to end, including oversight of those performing the work.
Jehovah is mankind's master builder.
As Gilead students, soon graduates, you have the precious privilege of further supporting the master builder
by strengthening and stabilizing his building up Jehovah's people.
How can you do that successfully?
Well, turn to me, please, to the book of the Psalms.
Psalm 127.
127 Psalm.
We'll look at verse one, words of wise King Solomon.
Psalm 127 and verse one.
Unless Jehovah builds the house.
And in Hebrew, a house can also refer to family.
So unless Jehovah builds the house, it is in vain that its builders work hard on it.
Unless Jehovah builds the house.
That's powerful.
Any endeavor, even well-intentioned that doesn't have Jehovah's blessing,
will ultimately be in vain.
So to build up Jehovah's family, we have to align our efforts with Jehovah's building methods.
So how can we, or how can you successfully do that?
Build up the branch family where you're assigned.
But I'd like to invite you to the book of Nehemiah.
We'll turn to Nehemiah chapter one.
And we'll see how he applied King Solomon's wise counsel to remember the builder,
and then what lessons we can learn from him.
We'll begin in chapter one and verse three, where Hanani, Nehemiah's brother,
is explaining Jerusalem's sad situation.
Let's pick up their conversation.
Verse three, they, or Hanani, and those who traveled with him replied,
those remaining there in the province who have survived the captivity,
are in a terrible situation, and in disgrace,
the walls of Jerusalem are broken down,
and its gates have been burned with fire.
Now how did Nehemiah react when he heard that information?
Well, let's look at verse four.
Nehemiah says, as soon as I heard these words,
I sat down and began to weep and mourn for days.
I kept fasting and notice and praying before the God of the heavens.
This news had a profound impact on him.
He wept, he mourned, he fasted.
Why? Because he loved Jehovah.
Jerusalem was a center of pure worship,
and he loved his brothers and sisters.
But the question is, what should he do about it?
He probably wanted to jump in and fix things right away.
But did you notice how he remembered the builder?
His feelings were appropriate.
Something was needed, but he didn't get ahead of things.
He took time to deal with his feelings,
and it says he prayed repeatedly.
He focused on the builder.
And it's interesting, Jehovah waited some four months or so
to answer those prayers.
Kids left to nice and,
whereas the rebuilding itself only took about 52 days.
Now four months may not be a long period of time,
but it's also not the next day.
In either case, Nehemiah waited for Jehovah's direction.
And when the direction came when the king granted all of the things he had prayed for,
Nehemiah could be confident that it was Jehovah doing the building.
Well, you know how Nehemiah felt.
You've seen Jehovah answer prayers in your life.
Continue to rely on prayer.
Even more so now as you take on new assignments,
encounter new situations.
And yes, when you have strong feelings on a matter.
Remember the builder.
Get his direction.
Another thing to remember about getting Jehovah's direction
is that it's not a passive process.
It's an active process.
While Nehemiah waited, he didn't just sit around killing time.
He was active in his spiritual routine and assignment.
And he kept meditating on the situation,
looking for solutions that Jehovah could bless,
and then including those in his prayers.
His spiritual routine helped him through the discouraging moments,
and it also helped him remain ready for when the answer did come.
We know this because in Nehemiah chapter two, verses four through eight,
when King Arthur Zerxes granted his request,
he asked Nehemiah, how long would your journey be?
When will you return?
Nehemiah already had a timetable in mind.
Nehemiah also asked for authorization letters for the governors,
and for building materials from the keeper of the royal park.
Nehemiah had been waiting actively, praying, meditating.
Well, situations today will not always be resolved in a day.
But like Nehemiah, your spiritual routine will provide you with stability,
and it'll help you be ready when the direction comes.
Another beautiful effect is that your example in the ministry
and in the meetings and in your assignments will also strengthen the friends.
As they two face challenges, they'll be helped to remember the builder.
Another way to remember the builder is to remember Jehovah's love for people.
Nehemiah even under difficult circumstances noticed people.
Turn to chapter three.
We'll look at some of the highlights here in chapter three.
Nehemiah is going around the city wall counterclockwise,
but notice what he describes there in chapter three.
We'll look first in verse one.
Says the high priest and his brothers were building the sheepgate.
Look at verse two.
The men of Jericho were building.
Let's go down to verse five.
There we see the humble tocoites working hard,
but the prominent ones, not so much.
There's a lesson in that.
Don't be a prominent tocoite.
We all want to work on the walls.
Go down to verse 12.
Here we notice Shalom who's a prince,
but who's working with him?
His hard-working daughters.
It helps us remind us our sisters that do so much in today's efforts to advance kingdom interests.
Turn to verse 20 here in the chapter.
This is barrack worked with fervor.
Nehemiah noticed people,
and Jehovah inspired him to write about them.
Why?
One reason is Jehovah wants us to remember why we're building.
He loves people.
Rebuilding the walls wasn't the end goal.
Rather, rebuilding the walls supported the end goal.
That of glorifying Jehovah, fulfilling prophecy,
and yes, protecting Jehovah's people.
Those actual walls were destroyed again later,
but the account of Nehemiah lives on today.
And those who worked on the wall,
they too hoped to live forever.
So get to know the people you're building with.
We're wonderful people.
Jehovah chooses amazing friends.
And like Nehemiah, appreciate their qualities.
Think of your congregation and your department as a spiritual building.
And the individual brothers and sisters were all the stones.
The mortar that binds us together
is the love and consideration we show each other.
For those of you brothers who may contribute to decision-making
when you return to your assignments,
humbly consider the ideas of others,
including brothers and sisters under your oversight.
Additionally, consider how a decision will affect others.
To strengthen others, we need to know and love them,
just like the builder does.
One final thought regarding our master builder.
Jehovah is a happy God.
Imperfection in Satan's system caused suffering.
That's true.
But remember that serving Jehovah brings joy
despite those challenges.
And there is strength in that joy.
After completing the wall in Nehemiah chapter 8 verse 10,
Nehemiah reminded the people that the joy of Jehovah was their stronghold.
Knowing that they had done Jehovah's will
and had Jehovah's approval gave them strength.
And that had an impact in them.
Notice that in Nehemiah chapter 12,
Nehemiah chapter 12 verse 43.
This verse talks about the day of inauguration
after all of the challenges had been overcome.
And notice how the people felt.
1243.
On that day, they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced
for the true God made them rejoice with great joy.
The women and the children also rejoiced
so that the rejoicing of Jerusalem could be heard far away.
Even with brand new high walls, they could be heard at a distance.
Sounds like the joyful noise before our meetings and assemblies
are even here this morning before your graduation program.
But did you notice?
It was Jehovah who made them rejoice.
Despite the challenges now and those to come,
strengthen others by remembering to enjoy Jehovah's service.
He's a happy God.
His psalmist said, unless Jehovah builds the house,
well, Jehovah is building the house.
And you dear graduates, along with all of us,
have the wonderful privilege of working alongside him in this building work.
As you strengthen and stabilize Jehovah's people,
humbly remember the builders.
Seek his direction and prayer.
Stay busy in your spiritual routine.
Love the brothers and sisters and enjoy serving Jehovah.
Like Nehemiah, your guaranteed success
and Jehovah will remember you favorably
when you remember the builder.
I don't know about you, but it makes me want to read the book of Nehemiah all over again.
Well, now we're going to hear from another recently appointed helper
to the service committee, brother Betty Georges,
and he's going to talk to us on the subject, the steps of love.
So what do you think?
What are the steps of love?
There are three.
Step one, love of God.
Step two, love of neighbor.
And step three, love of self.
Now, of course, we're not talking about the selfish, self-centered attitude
that people have today.
We all need a measure of self-worth, self-respect.
If we were to take a picture of these steps,
they would look something like this.
It makes sense that the highest step
and the first love of God
and the lowest and the third step, love of self.
Because according to the love of the Christ,
we ought to love our neighbor more than self
because we ought to be willing to die for our neighbor.
For the sake of this talk, we'll focus on step three.
Reason being, though the lowest for some,
it may be the hardest to climb because of lack of self-esteem.
The question to use this,
how can we help others build or boost their self-esteem?
What do you think?
By imitating Christ.
What did He do?
He gave love to others in three ways,
by being encouraging,
by caring and by trusting.
One example of Jesus being encouraging
is found at Luke, chapter 10.
So please follow with me, Luke, chapter 10.
And there, as we glance down to verse 27,
we have a man, verse in the law.
And there, he clearly identified the three steps
according to the love of Moses, the Mosaic love.
But note the encouragement Jesus gave him in verse 28.
Verse 28, Luke 10, 28.
Jesus, he said to him,
you answered correctly.
Keep doing this or giving love,
keep showing love,
and you will get life.
What's the lesson for us?
We want to be quick to give,
yes, commendation, but also motivation.
One watcher said this,
he said, watcher said,
at this point, in their ways for life,
our brothers, they don't need critics.
There's enough critics in the world,
but they need friends to help them reach the finish line.
At Luke, chapter 18,
we have an example of Jesus being caring,
showing tender, loving care.
So look 18.
And the context looks,
look 18, we are, well,
it's close to spring 33.
Jesus is on his way.
He's on a mission going to Jerusalem
to observe his last Passover.
And there in verse 35,
look 18, I'm sure you remember that,
the context.
Look 18 is near Jericho,
and Jericho to Jerusalem is a day's journey.
And there look 18, 35.
Near Jericho,
there's a blind man sitting beside the road begging.
What did Jesus do for this man?
Please scroll down to verse 40.
Verse 40.
Look 18, verse 40.
Jesus cared enough to stop.
He's on a mission, but he stopped.
Verse 41.
He cared enough to show personal interest.
You know this is a question?
Jesus asked the man,
what do you want me to do for you?
And we can try to picture,
imagine the tone of voice of Jesus.
What do you want me to do for you?
Let's think about this a little bit.
Is it possible Jesus could see the man was blind?
Probably.
So why the question?
Probably to take in consideration his feelings.
What do you need?
What do you want?
And interestingly, in verse 39,
the crowd was trying to keep this man quiet.
But now in verse 41,
Jesus speak to me.
What do you want?
What do you need?
How can I help you?
Personal interest.
And to drive home the lesson of this account,
here's a verified experience.
A brother took his nephew 13-year-old to visit Bethel.
And at the time the nephew was going through a family turmoil.
To the point that it caused him to lack motivation.
So as it turned Bethel,
Bethel light stopped and took a few minutes
to show personal interest.
The result?
At the very next assembly,
the 13-year-old got baptized.
Two years later, at 15, he started regular pioneer.
At 17, he was appointed a ministeral servant.
Now, as 19, he put in his application for Bethel.
All of this because someone stopped
and showed personal interest.
Can you think of an example?
Jesus shone trust to others.
Well, let's go to look.
This time, look 32.
No, 32.
22.
Look 22.
And as we look at verse 34,
look 22, verse 34.
It's when Jesus reminded,
or for war, not reminded for Warren Peter,
that he would deny him three times.
Now, let's pause there.
At that moment, when Peter denied his master three times,
what do you think was his level of self-worth?
Yeah.
At an all-time low.
Would I be so easy for Peter to just give up?
Never get back up.
But what helped him to climb back on to step three?
Probably what Jesus told him in the verse 32.
Look at the latter part of verse 32.
We'll focus on four words.
You notice once you have returned,
once you have returned.
And probably with these words,
I mean, I'm bringing in Peter's ears,
as he was down and out,
and slowly getting back up.
Once you have returned.
Because Jesus is expressing what's here,
expressing confidence.
Yes, you will fall,
but you will get back to step three.
But not only that,
hey, don't forget step two,
because you notice the latter part of verse 32,
once you have returned,
what's the mission?
Strengthen.
And the Greek word little means make firm your brothers.
Love is eager to believe the best in others.
Love is trusting.
So what could be the result,
as we help others to boost their self-esteem?
Well, let's go back to our image.
What could be the result?
Well, as you climb up to step three,
you agree, it makes it a little bit easier to go on to step two,
love of others,
or love of neighbor,
which is a prerequisite for love of God.
Step one.
What did Apostle John say?
What did he say?
Well, we cannot say we love God if we don't love our neighbor.
Having attended Gilead,
so you heard the fine talk about it gently.
What is expected of you to strengthen and stabilize the organization?
It has been said,
this can be done one publisher at a time.
And that reminds me about 10 years ago,
actually 10 years ago,
my wife and I were transferred from Canada to Congo.
And I'll never forget what a friend told me.
He said, you know what?
The friends in Congo
they don't need another Messiah.
Trust me they don't.
All they need is love.
So keep on loving as Jesus taught us
by being encouraging,
by caring,
by trusting.
And the friends will give you love back in return.
May Jehovah help you to do just that.
Yes, we love you.
Well, that was worthwhile, wasn't it?
Beautiful presentation.
Now, brother David Ionelli,
who's a member of the writing staff,
is going to speak to us on the theme,
never forget what Jehovah remembers.
There's something Jehovah remembers
that we do well never to forget.
It involves the way he views us
and treats us right now.
And all of us, including you,
who are graduating from Gilea today,
do well never to forget it.
What is it?
Well, open your Bible please to Psalm 103.
And the answer is in the familiar words
recorded at verse 14.
And just please keep your Bible open here.
The Psalmist David,
speaking of Jehovah, says,
for he well knows how we are formed,
remembering that we are dust.
Jehovah remembers that we are dust.
What does it mean?
And why should we never forget it?
Well, first, what does this expression mean?
Jehovah remembers that we're dust.
Simply put, this,
Jehovah is mindful of our sinful nature
and inclined to forgive repentant sinners.
Notice how the context indicates this.
If you look up at verses 1 and 2,
David begins the Psalm by exhorting himself
never to forget what Jehovah has done.
And what has Jehovah done?
Verse 3, first David mentions,
Jehovah forgives.
And in the verses that followed,
David four times refers to mercy,
the tender quality that moves Jehovah to forgive,
and he four times refers to loyal love,
the love that moves Jehovah to treat us
as his special property.
Forgiveness, mercy, loyal love,
they're connected.
How so?
Well, mercy prompts forgiveness.
As one scholar put it,
God's mercy is the cause,
the removal of sin, the result.
And in this context,
mercy and forgiveness are part of
Jehovah's loyal love.
You might think of Jehovah's loyal love as a large house.
Well, mercy and forgiveness are spacious rooms in that house.
And then we come to verses 11 through 13.
David uses a series of three similes,
powerful word pictures to describe first the height,
then the breadth, then the paternal tenderness
of what one Bible reference where it calls,
Jehovah's forgiving love.
And then we come to verse 14.
David now explains why Jehovah is inclined
to show us his forgiving love.
He says, he well knows how we are formed.
Jehovah is well aware that he formed Adam out of dust
from the ground and that even perfect humans
have natural limitations,
the need to eat, to sleep, to breathe.
But when Adam and Eve sinned,
being dust took on new meaning.
Regarding verse 14,
the watchtower once explained,
David was speaking about human frailties
caused by inherited imperfection.
So Jehovah is well aware of the frailties,
the limitations of our sinful nature.
He understands, he knows how easy it is
for a how prone we are to sin
and how strong the temptation to sin can be.
But Jehovah is not just aware of this.
David goes on to say, he remembers it.
And the Hebrew here can mean active remembering.
It implies a response from the one remembering.
In other words, because Jehovah remembers
that we're dust,
he is moved to do something.
Do what?
Well, according to the context,
to show mercy by forgiving repentant sinners.
So what's the lesson?
What's the meaning?
Jehovah remembers that we're dust?
Again, put simply,
he is mindful of our sinful nature
and inclined to show us his forgiving love.
We might sum up the lesson with three words.
Limitations,
expectations,
and dealings or actions.
Because Jehovah understands the limitations
of our sinful nature,
he expects that we will fall short at times.
And when we do,
he is inclined to deal mercifully with us
to forgive our repentant heart.
What about the second question, though?
Why should we, including you graduating today,
never forget what Jehovah remembers?
Well, for you members of the hundred fifty-fourth class,
not forgetting what Jehovah remembers,
can actually help you fulfill the purpose
of your Gilead training,
which, as we heard,
is to stabilize and strengthen the work.
Now, consider two ways that this psalm can help you
and, by extension, all of us listening in
to do just that.
First, to strengthen the work,
be a force for peace and unity
by imitating Jehovah's forgiveness.
How?
Well, recall the three key words.
Limitations influence expectations
which affect how we deal with others.
Now, it's interesting.
We often do this automatically.
Imagine a group of brothers playing soccer,
one twists his ankle badly.
The other brothers do not now expect him
to run, kick, do body feints.
They see the limitation.
They adjust their expectations.
And then they deal kindly,
perhaps gently helping him off the field.
And yet, in our everyday interactions with others,
it is so easy to forget what Jehovah remembers,
the limitations of our sinful nature.
So try this.
When you feel resentment welling up in you
because of what a fellow worker has said or done,
stop and ask yourself,
am I forgetting what Jehovah remembers,
the limitations of my brother's sinful, imperfect nature?
You see, by reflecting on the limitation,
you can adjust your expectations
which makes it easier to deal mercifully
by letting go of that resentment
and thus being a force for peace and unity.
What about the second way?
Here's the second way the psalm can help.
To strengthen the work, strengthen the workers,
for example, by helping others accept Jehovah's forgiveness.
At times, you may learn that a fellow worker
is struggling with stubborn guilt over past mistakes.
He's forgetting what Jehovah remembers,
that Jehovah is mindful of our limitations
and inclined to forgive.
But perhaps the brother is also remembering
what Jehovah forgets,
the sins that he's already forgiven
and will never hold against that brother.
How can you help him?
Well, try this.
Use Psalm 103, 14 to remind him
of why Jehovah is inclined to forgive
and then perhaps use verse 12
to remind him of how far-reaching that forgiveness is.
Verse 12 reads,
as far off as the sunrise or east
is from the sunset or west,
so far off he has put our transgressions.
How far is east from west?
The close to Jehovah book explains it this way.
In a sense, east is always
at the utmost distance imaginable from west.
The two points can never meet.
So what does that mean for our sins?
One reference work explained it this way.
If sin be removed so far,
then we may be sure that the scent,
the trace, the very memory of it
must be entirely gone.
A scent can trigger a memory.
But when Jehovah forgives,
he puts our sins so far off
that there remains not even the trace of a scent
that could possibly trigger him to remember it
and hold it against us.
Use Psalm 103 to help others
except Jehovah's far-reaching forgiveness.
If you strengthen the worker,
you strengthen the work.
So for you members of the 144th class,
as you leave here today,
may you be determined to use your gillied training
to strengthen the work and the workers.
And to that end, let the beautiful words
of Psalm 103 help you to number one,
be a force for peace and unity
by imitating Jehovah's forgiveness.
And number two, help downhearted ones
to correct that far-reaching forgiveness.
The lesson for you is really a lesson for us all.
May we never forget what Jehovah remembers
and while we're at it,
may we also do our best not to remember
what Jehovah forgets.
We appreciate that warm reassurance.
Now the next three speakers
are all members of the teaching staff
and Brother Clark here is the latest addition
to the teaching staff.
He was serving in Czechia,
the Czech Republic, before he came here.
I guess it was this year.
Was it Jeremy? You came here?
Anyway, he's going to speak to us on the theme,
may Jehovah know.
He was buried with the kings,
but he was not a king.
He lived 130 years,
but perhaps for the first 90 years of his life,
there is nothing recorded what he achieved.
And one major event that was recorded,
he had to keep secret
without others knowing for about six years.
Who is this man?
Hi, priest Jehojada.
What does Jehovah want you to know about him?
It is this.
Jehojada was loyal to Jehovah
even without recognition from others.
So the question to you is,
if only Jehovah knows
what you do and your loyalty,
without recognition from others,
is that enough to sustain you in your loyalty?
For how long? A year?
Two?
Six?
Longer?
Before you came to Gilead School,
maybe it mattered more to you
what others saw on you,
what they thought of you,
your achievements.
But in class, a deep study of the scriptures
opened up your heart.
You looked at attitudes and feelings
and thoughts, perhaps hidden there for a long time.
You looked long and hard
at the secret person of the heart,
which is of great value in the eyes of God.
The inner you.
And this drew you closer to Jehovah.
You felt his reassuring love.
Now more than ever,
I realize how much Jehovah sees you
and knows you.
Do you not have the same thoughts
as we find in Psalm 139?
Let's read the first four verses.
Psalm 139.
Oh, Jehovah,
you have searched through me
and you know me.
You know when I sit down
and when I rise up.
You discern my thoughts from afar.
You observe the way I travel
and when I lie down.
You're familiar with all my ways.
There is not a word on my tongue,
but look, oh, Jehovah,
you know it well.
You have joy that Jehovah knows you.
He always knew you,
but now you know that he knows you.
And you feel more secure in your relationship with him,
less concern about recognition from others.
This was Hyper-East Jehovah.
Now, he was born some years
after King Solomon's Temple was completed in 1027 BCE.
That means in his lifetime,
the nation of Israel split into
leaving only the two tribe kingdom
using the temple.
He saw kings of Judah
introduce idolatry, sex worship.
There were two good kings,
Asa and Jehoshaphat.
But remember, Jehoshaphat had his son,
Mary Jezebel's daughter,
Athalia from the north,
and brought her wicked influence
right into Jerusalem.
Things were going from bad to worse.
And in just a hundred years,
the temple was so neglected
that it needed a major repair
just to be structurally sound again.
Meanwhile, they built a temple for bail worship.
Judah sees all this.
Here he's an old man, the high priest.
How did he keep his loyalty
through those distressing years?
The Bible doesn't say.
But Jehovah knows it all
through meditation, prayer.
Wouldn't he have to look at his own heart,
his inner person?
Look at his attitude
and his feelings towards pure worship?
Not becoming lax
and standing for what is right.
Unlike high priest Eli,
when he got old.
And here, Jehoya is a man of authority,
yet he doesn't step outside
of the bounds of his assignment.
But he patiently waits on Jehovah.
Well, these years of loyal love
helped him face a greatest challenge
when he was old.
And this he had to do
without others knowing.
What was that?
Well, it's around 905 BCE.
And let's pick up the account
in 2 Chronicles 22.
Here we find King Ayazaya of Judah
has died.
And then the unimaginable happens.
2 Chronicles 22,
we'll start at verse 10.
When Atholaya, Ayazaya's mother,
saw that her son had died.
She rose up and destroyed
the entire royal line
of the house of Judah.
Atholaya kills her own grand sons
and makes herself queen illegally.
Now the Davidic line
to the promised offspring
is at risk of being cut off.
Let's read verse 11.
However,
Geosabius, the daughter of the king,
took Jehoash, the son of Ayazaya,
and stole him away from among
the sons of the king,
who would have been put to death.
And she put him and his nurse
in an inner bedroom.
Who's Geosabius?
Read on.
She's the daughter of King Jehorim.
She was the wife of Jehoaida,
the priest,
and the sister of Ayazaya.
And she managed to keep him,
the baby, concealed from Atholaya
so that she did not put him to death.
He remained with him for six years,
hidden at the house of the true God,
while Atholaya was ruling over the land.
For six long years,
Jehoaida, Geosabius,
and a nurse had a big secret,
a small baby,
in the last living air.
Now,
it's possible that this inner bedroom
could have been a storage room
at the palace.
And when it was safe,
they smuggled the baby into a chamber
in the temple.
If that happened,
imagine the risk,
the timing would have to be perfect
so they wouldn't get caught.
And in the temple for six years,
do you think there were some close calls?
While at one point,
Atholaya's own sons broke into the temple,
stole items for bail worship.
If that happened during this period,
imagine if they saw the child,
game over.
This means that not once,
could Jehoaida or Geosabius
let out their secret.
They couldn't complain to others.
They couldn't give up.
That means they had no recognition.
No acknowledgement,
no appreciation for their effort.
That means they rely on prayer,
looking to only Jehovah
for support and reassurance.
They would look to the scriptures,
like Psalm 139.
Oh, Jehovah,
you know me.
You can hear them adapted to their situation.
You know that we're protecting the rightful king.
And they're not just babysitting for six years,
they're teaching the child to love Jehovah.
Love his law.
Be a good king for Judah.
They would have to work unitedly as a couple.
And that brings us to her.
Let's talk about her for a moment.
Geosabius.
Clearly, Jehovah gives her the credit
for saving her nephew, Jehoash.
But at this point, how old is she?
Well, her father, King Jehorim,
who died the year before,
was only 40 years old.
So she is still quite young.
And yet married to a man,
some decades older than her.
So here we have a young woman,
who is royalty,
married to a much older man,
who has a position of high rank.
What's her angle?
Is she abusing her authority?
Is she trying to manipulate things,
like her stepmother Athalia?
No, she's risking her life
to protect the rightful king
in line with Jehovah's will,
supporting her husband and, apparently,
without recognition from others.
She reminds us of you, dear sisters.
Much of what you achieve
may not be as noticeable
as your husband's achievements.
And that could just be the nature of the assignment.
Which means you may get less attention.
But you take pleasure
in that Jehovah knows all that you do for him.
And we love you for that.
So you brothers,
many things you do will be noticed.
There may be some things
where you won't get recognition,
perhaps for a long time.
And by the way,
it's not wrong to get recognition.
As humans, we thrive on it.
And if you're ever in a position
where you can recognize the good work
or loyalty of someone else,
don't pass it up.
Let them know.
They appreciate it.
However, your loyalty is based on
not what others will see and know,
but on the unseen.
Loyalty from the heart.
Remember, Jehojada.
Yes, eventually everybody found out what he did
and he got honored.
But what was the secret to his success?
Was it not in the years before?
The small things, the hidden things,
the unseen, things only Jehovah knows?
The name Jehojada means
may Jehovah know
how fitting may Jehovah know
all your loyal acts.
Seen and unseen
and your father, who looks on in secret,
will repay you.
That certainly brought Jehojada to life, didn't it?
Well, Mark, New Mary,
usually has something very interesting to say.
Today, no pressure.
Today, he's going to talk to us on the subject,
side by side.
We don't know her name,
but we know her husband.
He was a hard-working fisherman,
outspoken apostle,
writer of two Bible books,
and the only person besides Jesus to walk on water,
we know Peter.
But sometimes we forget his wife.
What was Peter's wife like?
What were they like as a married couple?
And what can they teach you 24 married couples?
This is the first time in close to a decade
we've had an entire class of only married couples.
Thus, we've chosen Peter and his wife
so that you can learn specific lessons
that you can bring to your places of assignment,
but especially to strengthen your marriages
as you apply this
and you serve together side by side.
Let's begin by reading Mark chapter 1.
Mark chapter 1 verse 16.
While walking alongside the sea of Galilee,
he saw Simon. That's Jesus saw Simon
and Simon's brother Andrew casting their nets
into the sea for their fishermen.
Peter's a fisherman.
He brings home the fish.
His wife cooks the fish.
And if she doesn't cook the fish,
she sells the fish.
Like a capable proverbs 31 wife,
brings home the money that helps support the house.
It allows Peter to handle his responsibilities.
All as well.
A great couple,
working side by side together.
However,
life changes suddenly.
Verse 17 and 18.
So Jesus said to them,
come after me and I will make you fishers of men
and at once they abandon their nets and followed him.
In faith,
Peter abandons his fishing business and follows Jesus.
What did she think about that?
Did she expect that?
Did she become insecure
and uncertain now about the future?
Did which he feel that her life now has been upended
by the decisions of her impulsive,
big-hearted husband?
Peter, what are you doing?
We have very good reason to conclude
that Peter's wife supported the decision
and willing to and ready to stand right at Peter's side
as he took on added responsibilities.
Let's gain more insight into the life of Peter
and his wife with verse 29.
At that, they left the synagogue
and went to the home of Simon and Andrew,
with James and John.
Well, this verse explains that they went to the home
of Simon and Andrew.
They lived together.
So Peter's wife was agreeable
to sharing her living space with Andrew.
Peter's brother.
And likely the close friends of Peter,
James and John, were frequent guests.
And you can hear Peter saying,
come over anytime.
And his wife does the cooking.
That's the way it would work.
She could most likely hear the sons of thunder coming.
Here they come.
And Peter says, that's them.
Cook more fish.
That's the way it probably would be.
But here's the question.
Why could Peter feel free to bring his friends home?
And sometimes most likely they came in an unexpected manner
because he knew his wife.
And interestingly, when he wrote his first letter,
he advised husbands to dwell with their wives
according to knowledge.
Peter knew his wife.
And he knew that she would be willing to accommodate
the guests because she knew her husband.
That's Peter.
Come on over.
She and Peter were a team.
She knew that having them in the home
inconvenience, we get that.
But think of the conversations that she would be privy to
as Peter and you, James, John, would discuss Jesus' ministry.
She would sit there, oh my, I'm so glad they came.
The blessing that she would get as they talked about Jesus' ministry.
So here's your first big lesson.
Something very similar can happen to you as a couple.
Your husband's good shepherding.
It will result in warm conversations
and strong friendships are forged.
And that could lead to spontaneous invitations.
Like, say, come on over for a snack.
And you get a text, guess who's coming to dinner?
But is it inconvenient at times?
Yes.
But there is a Bible principle.
And the Bible principle here overrides all cultures past and present.
Be self-sacrificing and hospitable.
So be like Peter and his wife.
And think of the spiritual blessings you would receive
as you get to know your brothers and sisters better.
That overrides even the inconvenience.
But the self-sacrificing spirit of this dynamic couple
doesn't stop there.
Let's read verse 30.
Now Simon's mother-in-law was lying down sick with a fever.
And they at once told her about, they once told him,
Jesus about her.
So now we learn that Peter and his wife are caring for a parent.
And at this moment she is sick.
And what demands that place is on a married couple
you know that, caring for a sick parent.
And for a married couple to live with one in law
naturally has its challenges.
But living with a brother-in-law and a mother-in-law,
now that brings it to an entirely new level.
Can you hear Peter's wife whispering to Peter?
Your brother Andrew is driving me crazy.
And Peter being tempted to blurt out,
well what about your mother?
No, but we're not saying that ever happened.
Nevertheless, we know that living with in laws and caring
for aging parents poses unique challenges for a couple.
That would require great sacrifices.
That's what we're talking about.
However, with sacrifices comes blessings.
Just as we've discussed over and over in class,
where the sacrifice comes a blessing.
Verse 31.
Jesus performs a miracle right in the home.
Mom is cured.
Imagine that.
What a tender intimate moment this must have been
for Peter and his wife.
Thank Jehovah.
They probably said it heartfelt prayer thanking Jehovah.
Intimate, quiet, prayerful.
But look what happens next.
Verse 32 and 33.
After evening had fallen, when the sun had set,
the people began bringing to him all who were ill and demon possessed.
And the whole city was gathered right at the door.
Where's the intimacy now?
It went from quiet to chaos.
Imagine the scene, sick people from all over.
Come to Peter's house to get healed.
How would you feel the whole city of sick and demon possessed people showed up at your door?
Talk about uninvited guests.
And Peter's wife didn't have time to prepare and plan and make the house a perfect.
And not yet the table's not right.
The chairs aren't right.
No, that wasn't it.
Things weren't perfect.
And what if a crowd that size damaged the home?
Like the desperate Jews who won a later occasion
made a hole in someone's roof to drop down someone so that they could be healed?
At this point, Peter's wife certainly could have complained.
Get these people out of here.
But there is no record of a complaint.
Consider this.
Years later, when Peter counseled wives to cultivate the quiet and mild spirit,
did his wife's example give him the freedom of speech
to offer that advice?
And Peter must have thanked his wife, thanked her,
for her loyally being by his side as they supported Jesus' ministry.
Another big lesson for you.
As you deal with aging parents and health issues,
look for Jehovah's Blessing and enjoy your periods of calm.
However, remember that we are living at a time when the scene of the world is changing.
And it can change quickly.
A natural disaster, civil unrest, can break out unexpectedly.
And you might have to accommodate those seeking aid.
And though you might not be ready for that, things aren't perfect.
Don't worry about that.
But allow yourself sacrificing spirit to just move forward,
going the extra mile.
And husbands don't forget to thank your wife for being by your side
as you respond to the needs of the organization.
First Corinthians chapter 9 and verse 5 indicates that Peter's wife traveled with him
for at least some of the time.
Traveling with Peter would have included hard trips, dangerous conditions.
Peter was arrested in Jerusalem one time, two times, three times arrested again,
flogged.
This time James was arrested with him.
James is beheaded.
Would Peter's wife say, well, I see my husband again?
It could not have been easy to be married to a man so involved in sacred service.
Between the year 62 and 64, we find Peter who is now perhaps in his 60s.
Going with the need is greater in Babylon, where Jehovah inspired him to write two letters.
As he is finishing his second letter and what now would become the twilight of his life,
how thankful he must have been to have had such a faithful, loving, loyal wife by his side over the years.
The things considered, here's the gold, work on selflessly as a team.
Be positive when confronted with unexpected challenges.
And husbands highly value the loyal support of your wife and thank her.
Wives realize that after Jehovah in Jesus, you are probably the closest person that can work intimately
with your husband for his success and, of course, your own.
And for you 24 dear couples, be determined to maintain your stride as you serve together side by side.
Well, that was very enjoyable, wasn't it?
We hope you enjoyed Part 1.
Parts 2 and 3 will be available on JW.org later this month.
Our postcard for this month is from Uruguay.
Located between Argentina and Brazil, Uruguay has beautiful coastlines along the Atlantic Ocean and rolling hills in its interior.
The pristine beaches of Punta del Este is a popular tourist destination.
Several rivers in the country, such as the Rio Negro and the Rio de la Plata,
create stunning landscapes and make the soil fertile.
These breathtaking views provide a picturesque backdrop for preaching the good news.
Uruguay currently has 149 congregations preaching in five different languages, including Uruguay and Sign Language,
and Portuinal, a pigeon language composed of Spanish and Portuguese.
Like the fertile productive fields where they preach, the harvest in the ministry is great,
as the 12,000 publishers average 11,000 Bible studies per month.
In the 1960s, missionaries use rafts to traverse the Sabayati River in order to reach remote territories,
and the tradition continues to this day.
Trucks loaded with carts are varied across the river so that publishers can witness
in the local town squares.
After a long day of preaching, brothers and sisters enjoy relaxing around campfires, singing and enjoying mate,
a traditional herbal drink made with yerba that pairs well with tortas fritas or fried cakes.
The 30 publishers of the Sabayati congregation and all the brothers and sisters in Uruguay
send their love and greetings to the worldwide brotherhood.
From the world headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses, this is JW Broadcasting.